Restructure import/export section and add grid layout and community package migrator documentation (#6285)
umbraco/UmbracoDocs: 13/umbraco-deploy/deployment-workflow/import-with-migrations.md

For example, we can migrate from a Nested Content property in Umbraco 8 to a Block List in Umbraco 13.

We provide the necessary migration hooks for this to happen, divided into two types - **artifact migrators** and **property migrators**.

### Artifact migrators

Artifact migrators work by transforming the serialized artifact of any imported artifact, via two interfaces:

- `IArtifactMigrator` - where the migration occurs at the artifact property level
- `IArtifactJsonMigrator` - where the migration occurs at the lower level of transforming the serialized JSON itself.

Implementations to handle common migrations of Data Types from obsoleted property editors are available:

- `ReplaceMediaPickerDataTypeArtifactMigrator` - migrates a Data Type from using the legacy Media Picker to the current version of this property editor
- `ReplaceNestedContentDataTypeArtifactMigrator` - migrates a Data Type based on the obsolete Nested Content property editor to the Block List
- `ReplaceGridDataTypeArtifactMigrator` - migrates a Data Type based on the legacy Grid layout into the Block Grid
- `ReplaceUnknownEditorDataTypeArtifactMigrator` - replaces any unknown editor alias with a label

> We've also made available base implementations that you can use to build your own migrations. You may have a need to handle transfer of information between other obsolete and replacement property editors that you have in your Umbraco application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've also made available base implementations that you can use to build your own migrations. You may need to handle the transfer of information between other obsolete and replacement property editors that you have in your Umbraco application.
```

- `ReplaceDataTypeArtifactMigratorBase` - migrates a Data Type from one property editor to another
- `ArtifactJsonMigratorBase<TArtifact>` - migrates the JSON of the specified artifact type
- `ReplaceGridDataTypeArtifactMigratorBase` - migrates a Data Type based on the legacy Grid layout into the Block Grid

### Property migrators

Property migrators work to transform the content property data itself. They are used in the Deploy content connectors (documents, media and members) when the property editor is changed during an import:

Again we have an interface:

- `IPropertyTypeMigrator`

Implementations for common migrations:

- `MediaPickerPropertyTypeMigrator`
- `NestedContentPropertyTypeMigrator`
- `GridPropertyTypeMigrator`

And a base type to help you build your own migrations:

- `PropertyTypeMigratorBase`
- `GridPropertyTypeMigratorBase`

{% hint style="info" %}
Property editor changes are determined by comparing the `PropertyEditorAliases` dictionary stored in the content artifact to the current Content Type/Data Type configuration. The dictionary contains editor aliases for each content property.
{% endhint %}

### Registering migrators

> Migrators will run if you've registered them to, hence you can enable only the ones needed for your solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Migrators will run if you have registered them, so you can enable only the ones needed for your solution.
```

You can do this via a composer, as in the following example. Here we register two of the migrators shipped with Umbraco Deploy:

```csharp
using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Composing;
using Umbraco.Deploy.Core.Migrators;
using Umbraco.Deploy.Infrastructure.Migrators;

internal class ArtifactMigratorsComposer : IComposer
{
    public void Compose(IUmbracoBuilder builder)
    {
        builder.DeployArtifactMigrators()
            .Append<ReplaceNestedContentDataTypeArtifactMigrator>()
            .Append<ReplaceMediaPickerDataTypeArtifactMigrator>();

        builder.DeployPropertyTypeMigrators()
            .Append<NestedContentPropertyTypeMigrator>()
            .Append<MediaPickerPropertyTypeMigrator>();
    }
}
 ```

### Details of Specific Migrations

Umbraco Deploy ships with migrators to handle the conversion of core property editors as they have changed, been removed or replaced between versions.

> Open source migrators may be built by HQ or the community for property editors found in community packages. They will be made them available for [use](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Umbraco.Deploy.Contrib) and [review](https://github.com/umbraco/Umbraco.Deploy.Contrib/tree/v13/dev/src/Umbraco.Deploy.Contrib/Migrators) via the `Umbraco.Deploy.Contrib` package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open source migrators may be built by HQ or the community for property editors found in community packages. They will be made available for [use](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Umbraco.Deploy.Contrib) and [review](https://github.com/umbraco/Umbraco.Deploy.Contrib/tree/v13/dev/src/Umbraco.Deploy.Contrib/Migrators) via the `Umbraco.Deploy.Contrib` package.
```

#### Grid to Block Grid

The grid editor introduced in Umbraco 7 has been removed from Umbraco 14. It's functionality is replaced with the Block Grid.

With Deploy migrators we have support for migrating Data Type configuration and property data between these property editors.

You can configure the default migration with the following composer:

```csharp
using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Composing;
using Umbraco.Deploy.Infrastructure.Migrators;

internal sealed class DeployMigratorsComposer : IComposer
{
    public void Compose(IUmbracoBuilder builder)
    {
        builder.DeployArtifactMigrators()
            .Append<ReplaceGridDataTypeArtifactMigrator>();

        builder.DeployPropertyTypeMigrators()
            .Append<GridPropertyTypeMigrator>();
    }
}
```

> Thee implementations make use of the following conventions to migrate the data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These implementations make use of the following conventions to migrate the data:
```

      - `boolean` - the default 'Checkbox', falling back to the first `Umbraco.TrueFalse` editor.
      - `number` - the default 'Numeric', falling back to the first `Umbraco.Integer` editor.
      - `treepicker`, `treesource`, `textarea` or any other - the default 'Textarea', falling back to the first `Umbraco.TextArea` editor.
- `GridPropertyTypeMigrator`:
  - Gets the grid layout and row configuration element types based on the alias prefix/name convention used by the Data Type artifact migrator;
  - The grid editor values are migrated to the respective properties:
    - The `media` grid editor converts the value to a media item with crops (based on the UDI or media path), including the focal point (although this needs to be enabled on the Data Type), alternate text and caption;
    - All other values are converted to a text value or otherwise to a JSON string;
  - If a row or cell contains settings config or styles and the corresponding block has a settings element type configured, the settings config and styles are migrated to their respective properties in a similar way, based on the property editor alias:

>     - `Umbraco.MediaPicker3` - removes `url('` from the beginning and `')` from the end of the value (commonly used as modifier and added to the stored value), before trying to get the media item by path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `Umbraco.MediaPicker3` - removes `url('` from the beginning and `')` from the end of the value (commonly used as a modifier and added to the stored value), before trying to get the media item by a path.
```

    - All other values are returned as-is.

Given the flexibility of the grid editor and Block Grid you may want to take further control over the migration. You can do that by creating your own migrator classes, that make use of our provided base classes. You would then register your own migrators instead of the ones shipped with Umbraco Deploy in your composer.

The base classes provide the following functionality. Methods you should look to override to amend the default behavior have been noted above.

- `ReplaceGridDataTypeArtifactMigratorBase` - replaces the `Umbraco.Grid` Data Type editor alias with `Umbraco.BlockGrid` and migrates the configuration:

>   - The amount of columns is copied over.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The number of columns is copied over.
```

#### Migrating from Matryoshka

[Matryoshka](https://our.umbraco.com/packages/backoffice-extensions/matryoshka-tabs-for-umbraco-8/) was an Umbraco package that added tab support for document types in Umbraco. The feature was subsequently added to the product itself.

We provide a migrator for this package in `Umbraco.Deploy.Contrib`.

This adds support for migrating Matryoshka Group Separators into native property groups. It removes the Matryoshka Data Types during import and migrates the document, media and member types. Native property groups are also changed into tabs, similarly to how they were displayed with Matryoshka installed.

To use, you register the migrators:

```csharp
using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Composing;
using Umbraco.Deploy.Infrastructure.Migrators;

internal sealed class DeployMigratorsComposer : IComposer
{
    public void Compose(IUmbracoBuilder builder)
    {
        builder.DeployArtifactMigrators()
            .Append<ReplaceMatryoshkaArtifactMigrator>();
    }
}
```

### Source Code Example -  Nested Content to Block List

As described above, the nested content to block list migration will occur register the corresponding migrator with your application.

> In order to help writing your own migrations. we share here the source code of an example that ships with Umbraco Deploy. This migration converts Nested Content to Block List.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To help write your own migrations, we share the source code of an example that ships with Umbraco Deploy. This migration converts Nested Content to Block List.
```
